more import docs; format=esm platform=browser (#1166)
observablehq/framework: docs/javascript/imports.md

# JavaScript: Imports

You can load a library using an [`import` statement](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/import). For example, to load [canvas-confetti](https://github.com/catdad/canvas-confetti) from npm:

```js echo
import confetti from "npm:canvas-confetti";
```

The code above imports the default export and is equivalent to:

```js run=false
import {default as confetti} from "npm:canvas-confetti";
```

Depending on the package, you may want to import specific named exports, or to import everything as a namespace. For example:

```js run=false
import {rollup} from "npm:d3-array"; // a single named import

> import * as d3 from "npm:d3"; // a namespace import

Reviewer: This shows two changes. I understand it makes sense to only import from d3-array when you need only rollup, but it makes the example more difficult to understand. (People might wonder how d3-array is different from d3, and how they could tell.)

Author: The point is “depending on the package” in the line above. It depends on what you need too, of course. But I wouldn’t recommend `import {rollup} from "npm:d3"` since you would pull in all 30 packages even though you just need d3-array. And I wouldn’t recommend `import * as d3 from "npm:d3-array"` because it gives the impression that all of D3 is available. So we could say `import * as array from "npm:d3-array"` here, but is that better? I can’t think of a situation where I would use that over specific named imports.

Reviewer: maybe reorder and adapt the comments:

```suggestion
import * as d3 from "npm:d3"; // import all of D3 with a namespace import
import {rollup} from "npm:d3-array"; // a single named import from a specific module
```

Author: I ordered it to match the sentence above “you may want to import specific named exports, or to import everything as a namespace.” I can reorder that sentence too but I don’t understand why it’s easier to understand if the namespace is first? If anything I think importing the default export as shown in the canvas-confetti examples is closer to importing a namespace.

Author: I changed the namespace comment to `// import everything as a namespace`. Does that help?

```js echo
Inputs.button("Throw confetti! 🎉", {reduce: () => confetti()})
```

<div class="tip">While imports can live in code blocks anywhere on the page, by convention imports are placed at the top of pages for readability.</div>

Framework provides a variety of ways to import. When you reference `d3`, `Inputs`, `Plot` or some other built-in, you’re [implicitly importing](#implicit-imports) from npm. In addition, you can import modules explicitly from:

- [npm](#npm-imports),
- [`node_modules`](#node-imports),
- [local paths](#local-imports), or
- [remote URLs](#url-imports).

With the exception of remote URL imports, imported modules are bundled with your project, improving performance and security. In some cases, such as stylesheets and WebAssembly modules, you may need to specify additional files to download via [`import.meta.resolve`](#dynamic-imports).

## npm imports

Framework downloads `npm:` imports from the [npm package registry](https://www.npmjs.com/) via the [jsDelivr CDN](https://www.jsdelivr.com/esm). Unlike [imports from `node_modules`](#node-imports), you don’t have to install `npm:` imports — just import, and the cloud shall provide. 😌

> By default, npm imports resolve to the latest version of the given package. Imported versions are resolved on build, or during preview after you clear your [npm cache](#self-hosting-of-npm-imports) and restart the server. To load an earlier or specific version of a package, add a [semver range](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-semantic-versioning). For example, to load major version 1 of canvas-confetti:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, npm imports resolve to the latest version of the given package. Imported versions are resolved on build or during preview and cached in your [npm cache](#self-hosting-of-npm-imports). To load an earlier or specific version of a package, add a [semver range](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-semantic-versioning). For example, to load major version 1 of canvas-confetti:
```

“Imported versions are resolved on build, or during preview” reads as if build did not use the npm cache and always did a fresh resolution.

```js run=false
import confetti from "npm:canvas-confetti@1";
```

If the import path is not specified, it defaults to the default entry point is determined by the `package.json`; see [jsDelivr’s GitHub](https://github.com/jsdelivr/jsdelivr/issues/18263) for details. To load a different entry point, specify the desired path. For example, to load mime’s `lite` entry point:

```js run=false
import mime from "npm:mime/lite";
```

Similarly, to load the file `dist/confetti.module.mjs` from canvas-confetti:

```js run=false
import confetti from "npm:canvas-confetti/dist/confetti.module.mjs";
```

> <div class="tip">If you’re having difficulty importing, it may help to browse the package and see what files are available, and what’s exported in the <code>package.json</code>. You can browse the contents of a published module via jsDelivr; for example, for canvas-confetti see <a href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/canvas-confetti/">https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/canvas-confetti/</a>.</div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<div class="tip">If you’re having difficulty importing, it may help to browse the package and see what files are available, and what’s exported in the <code>package.json</code>. You can browse the contents of a published module via jsDelivr; for example, see <a href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/canvas-confetti/">https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/canvas-confetti/</a>.</div>
```

### Self-hosting of npm imports

> Framework downloads `npm:` imports from jsDelivr during preview and build. This improves performance and security of your built site by removing runtime dependencies on external sites. It also improves performance during local preview by only downloading libraries once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Framework downloads `npm:` imports from jsDelivr during preview and build. This improves performance and security of your built site and of the local preview by removing runtime dependencies on external sites.
```

Author: It doesn’t remove the dependency from preview, though, since you still have the dependency the first time you import the library (before it is cached). Also I think “runtime dependency” only makes sense in the context of build (where “runtime” refers to running the built site); during preview, everything is runtime.

Author: Okay, I removed this line, and instead added “An imported module is downloaded from jsDelivr only if it is not already in the cache” to the next paragraph, which I think is better because it explains a little more the nature of our caching: it never expires, and versions are resolved against what’s in the cache. Although I don’t say this so explicitly… and I don’t want to explain “satisfying” semantic versions _etc._ 😓

To import from `node_modules`, use a bare specifier without the `npm:` protocol, such as `d3` or `lodash`. For example, to import [he](https://github.com/mathiasbynens/he):

```js run=false
import he from "he";
```

As with `npm:` imports, you can import specific [entry points](https://nodejs.org/api/packages.html#package-entry-points). For example, to import mime’s `lite` entry point:

```js run=false
import mime from "mime/lite";
```

Unlike `npm:` imports, node imports do not support semver ranges: the imported version is determined by what is installed in your `node_modules` directory, which in turn is determined by your `package.json` file, your package manager’s lockfile, _etc._ Use your package manager (_e.g._, `npm update`) to change which version is imported.

Imports from `node_modules` are cached in `.observablehq/cache/_node` within your [source root](../config#root) (`docs` by default). You shouldn’t need to clear this cache as it is automatically managed, but feel free to clear it you like.

> Framework (via esbuild) automatically converts CommonJS to ES modules. However, not all Node-compatible packages are usable in the browser; node imports are only supported for browser-compatible modules that do not rely on Node-specific APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Framework (via [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/)) automatically converts CommonJS to ES modules. However, not all Node-compatible packages are usable in the browser; node imports are only supported for browser-compatible modules that do not rely on Node-specific APIs.
```

```js echo
import.meta.resolve("npm:canvas-confetti")
```

While useful for debugging, `import.meta.resolve` also allows you to download files from npm. These files are automatically downloaded for self-hosting, too. For example, to load U.S. county geometry:

```js run=false
const data = await fetch(import.meta.resolve("npm:us-atlas/counties-albers-10m.json")).then((r) => r.json());
```

As with dynamic imports, Framework only resolves statically-analyzable import resolutions, as when `import.meta.resolve` is passed a single string literal.

## Module preloads

Static imports are [preloaded](#module-preloads) such that imported modules are loaded in parallel and as early as possible, rather than being chained and waiting until JavaScript code execution. This can dramatically reduce page load times. Framework also preloads imports for [`FileAttachment`](./files) methods, such as d3-dsv for [CSV](../lib/csv).

An import of canvas-confetti is preloaded as:

```html run=false
<link rel="modulepreload" href="/_npm/canvas-confetti@1.9.2/_esm.js">
```

> Module preloading applies to transitive dependencies, too. For example, `npm:d3-array` has two dependencies which are preloaded as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Module preloading applies to transitive dependencies, too. For example, `npm:d3-array` has two dependencies (`isoformat` and `internmap`) which are preloaded as:
```

```js echo
Inputs.button("Throw confetti! 🎉", {reduce: () => confetti()})
```

<div class="tip">Imports can live in code blocks anywhere on the page. But by convention, imports are commonly placed at the top of pages for readability.</div>

Framework provides a variety of ways to import. When you reference `d3` or `Inputs` or `Plot`, you’re [implicitly importing](#implicit-imports) from npm. In addition, you can import modules explicitly from:

- [npm](#npm-imports),
- [`node_modules`](#node-imports),
- [local paths](#local-imports), or
- [remote URLs](#url-imports).

With the exception of remote URL imports, imports are self-hosted during preview and build: imported modules are downloaded and bundled with your project, improving performance and security. Self-hosting also allows you to control when you upgrade an imported library.

## npm imports

Framework downloads `npm:` imports, as above, from the [npm package registry](https://www.npmjs.com/) via the [jsDelivr CDN](https://www.jsdelivr.com/esm). Unlike [imports from `node_modules`](#node-imports), you don’t have to install `npm:` imports — just import, and the cloud shall provide. 😌

> By default, npm imports resolve to the latest version of the given package. Since imports are [self-hosted](#self-hosting-of-npm-imports), the resolved version can only change when you re-build your site, or during preview when you clear your npm cache and restart the server.

Author: The cache is documented in the “self-hosting of npm imports” section.

To load a specific version of a package, say to load an earlier version, add a [semver range](https://docs.npmjs.com/about-semantic-versioning). For example, to load major version 1 of `canvas-confetti`:

```js run=false
import confetti from "npm:canvas-confetti@1";
```

If an import path is not specified, it defaults to `/+esm`. The default entry point is determined by the `package.json`, and its `exports`, `main`, `browser`, `module`, and other fields; see [jsDelivr’s GitHub](https://github.com/jsdelivr/jsdelivr/issues/18263) for technical details.

To load a different entry point, specify the desired path. For example, to load the `lite` entry point to the `mime` package:

```js echo
import mime from "npm:mime/lite";
```

> To instruct jsDelivr to bundle the specified code into an ES module, you can add `/+esm` to the end of the path like so:

Author: Yep, I’m still working on this. I’ll ping when it’s ready for review.

## Require

> If you’re familiar with Observable notebooks, you be familiar with `require`. We recommend that you avoid `require` as the underlying Asynchronous Module Definition (AMD) convention has been made obsolete by standard imports in JavaScript, and AMD tends to be implemented inconsistently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re familiar with Observable notebooks, you may be familiar with `require`. We recommend that you avoid `require` as the underlying Asynchronous Module Definition (AMD) convention has been made obsolete by standard imports in JavaScript, and AMD tends to be implemented inconsistently.
```
